I met up with science author and visionary
Gregg Braden in Sedona recently,
where he was unveiling some of his newest work.
Gregg is saying that we need to have
a new understanding of the term intelligent design
as he suggests that man did not evolve in the
Darwinian sense, rather was created by some other mechanism.
He bases his evidence on several factors,
not the least of which is that the human brain
has been at its current size for at least 200,000 years.
In addition, he says we're on the verge of a breakthrough
of understanding, according to his fractal time codes
for 2011.
Greg, it's good to see you again,
it's been exactly a year, not exactly to the day,
but just about, and things have progressed.
Changes are occurring at lightening speed around the planet
and we have talked about some of this
when we talked last year,
and one of the things, when I was listening to you
last night, you really getting into
is this whole notion of the gap between
science and reality.
In terms of looking at evidence versus proof
and these are terms that really have to start coming
into play now
and one of the things you were saying last night
is science absolutely now,
has to let go of some very important
what they consider to be deep truths or tenants.
And if you could just launch in by telling us some of those
that need to be let go of now.
We can't even go that way anymore.
Well, once again, the best minds of our time
are telling us no uncertain terms,
that we are in trouble.
And I'm gonna be very clear,
it's less about Earth being in trouble,
and more about the people who live on the Earth
being in trouble.
We certainly have done some damage
to the planet,
but my sense is Earth is gonna be here 5,000 years from now,
whether or not anyone is on Earth to enjoy the beauty
of this world is being determined right now.
What they're telling us,
scientists, engineers, political leaders,
religious leaders, spiritual leaders,
social architects, they're all,
from their different perspectives,
converging with this agreement,
that we're facing the greatest number of crisis
and the greatest magnitude of each individual crisis,
that we've ever faced as in 5,000 years of recorded
human history.
And the reason this is all coming to the forefront now
is because they're telling us we have a very brief time
to figure this out,
depending on what crisis we're talking about.
Environmental crisis, they're saying
maybe eight to 10 years.
Jeffery Sachs, director of the Earth Institute of
Columbia University,
he's saying that we're already in unsustainable territory.
Well, look what's happening with the birds
and the fish and yesterday I read 7,000
buffalo and cows died in Vietnam
in a very short period of time.
We don't know what's causing this,
we don't know what's causing this rapid die off.
Evolutionary biologists tell us
that there have been five mass extinctions
in the history of the Earth,
and people weren't alive during all five of those
in geologic time.
There have been five mass extinctions
and that we are now deep into what is confirmed to be
the sixth mass extinction.
The question is, will humankind be among those
creatures that are now leaving this world?
So, depending on which crisis we're looking at,
we have a varying amounts of time.
From my perspective,
the greatest threat right now
is the threat of war.
War, in the 21st century,
would be unlike any war, global war,
any war that we've seen in the past.
The weapons, the technology--
The number of countries with the weapons.
The number of countries that have the weapons--
The conflicting interest.
And the ideas of war have changed so much.
War is no longer about a boundary between,
a clearly defined boundary between two countries,
and clearly defined uniforms,
that clearly define who it is that's doing the fighting.
These are wars of ideas that percolate
throughout a global population.
And political tensions, oil,
the tensions between Iran and Israel, now,
are all triggering this wartime mentality,
that there must be a war to solve this problem.
And I'm just using these as examples,
all of these things
and other crisis, certainly the climate,
certainly the new diseases,
the lack of growing shortages of food,
the lack of clean water,
population explosion that's happening right now,
the poverty that is wreaking havoc
throughout the world,
Yes.
in increasing numbers,
including the United States of America.
All of these are among the crisis,
the experts telling us, pose the greatest threats
to our survival and the greatest number
of magnitude of crisis recorded
in human history.
We're being asked to solve these problems
and to make choices based upon
the way that we think of ourselves
and our relationship to the world.
And this is, for me,
this is, it's subtle and it's so powerful.
Yes.
It's so powerful because,
one little shift in the way we think of ourselves
and our relationship to one another and the world,
makes all the difference in how we apply what we know
to solve the problems.
And where we get into trouble with this,
is that what we know about ourselves
and what we consider the modern Western world,
is largely based upon the ideas that science
is giving us, since science was birthed 300 years ago,
and I was trained as a scientist,
I believe in science and the scientific method,
and science is good to help us unlock the mysteries
of our lives and the world,
when science is applied in the way that
it was designed,
to honestly uncover answers,
and when--
Honestly being the operative word.
Honesty is important in science.
And here's what I mean by that,
when an idea or a theory is supported by the facts
as we know them,
then that becomes the accepted world view
until the facts change,
and when the facts change,
the ideas and the theories must change.
And if they do not,
then the scientific ideas are no longer scientific,
they are not honoring the principles of science, itself.
This is precisely where we find ourselves
in the world today.
We're being asked to solve the greatest crisis
that threaten our very survival,
this isn't just backroom chit-chat that is interesting.
Our, literally, our survival hinges upon
the way we answer these questions.
We're being asked to answer the questions
and make the choices with incomplete
and in some cases,
absolutely false scientific assumptions,
that science and the scientific world
have been reluctant to release
in light of the new evidence
that's proving them wrong.
So, what I'd like to do,
is just identify a couple of these.
What they are,
what we now know,
and why it affects the choices that we're making.
Are you okay if we--
Absolutely.
I think one of the,
one of the clearest examples of this,
we've spoken about before
in other interviews,
was the idea that everything is separate
from everything else.
In 1887 there was an experiment
that was performed to determine
once and for all, whether or not,
there's a field of energy that connects everything,
the field's not there, everything's separate.
The experiment was performed with the
equipment available in 1887.
The experiment found, from that time,
the interpretations were that there is no field
that connects everything.
From 1887 until late in the 20th century,
science had been basing the idea
that everything is separate from everything else
and that what we do in one place
has no effect and makes no difference
on what we do somewhere else.
And that is certainly reflected in our civilization
and the way we live our lives.
1987, the same experiment was repeated
by United States Airforce
using much better equipment,
what they found is not only is the field there,
it's there precisely the way the scientist,
Michelson–Morley, expected in 1887.
That information is in very
isolated scientific journals.
It has not made it into mainstream teaching--
Would you think that would, exactly.
In 1980, exactly, in 1987 the experiments were done,
they were published in peer reviewed journals
like a very prestigious journal, Nature, for example.
And it goes against the grain
of so many other traditions of science
that scientists have chosen, have elected,
to simply discount this fact.
It's not talked about,
it's not taught in the classrooms,
when I was in school and people my age that have children,
and their children are being taught
everything is separate from everything else.
This is one example of a false assumption of science.
Another false assumption
is that civilization as we know it
is only about 5,000 years old.
5,000, 5500 years.
When I was in school,
and what is being taught in our schools right now,
is that the Mesopotamian civilization,
in Mesopotamia Valley in ancient Sumeria,
are the oldest known civilizations to exist.
And if you look at, go to any textbook,
look at a conventional timeline of history,
and it shows 3500 BC,
5500 years ago, is when civilization began.
The problem, is the evidence does not support that idea
any longer.
Verified, peer reviewed, archaeological evidence,
using accepted scientific methods,
are now proving, this isn't simply evidence,
this is proof that there have been advanced civilizations
in our world that are at least twice as old
as what is now accepted.
Gobekli Tepli,
Gobekli Tepe, I'm sorry, in Turkey, for example,
11,500 years before the present time,
it's now being accepted in the realms of archaeologists.
Archaeologists have the data,
they're looking at the dates,
they're saying, of course, this is what's happening.
Historians, this is a horrible problem,
because it messes up the timeline of history.
Gobekli Teple, Gobekli Tepe.
Tepe, yes, that's a hard one
to pronounce.
T-E-P-E.
T-E-P-E, right.
G-O-B-E-K-L-I,
T-E-P-E.
Mmm hmm.
And this is a site, it's an amazing site.
Earth imaging radar has found
there are at least 15 to 20 of these
massive circular temple sites
buried beneath the ground.
Four to five have been excavated so far.
Now, if I understood you last night,
those were buried?
This is what's interesting.
That's what's, yes.
They were buried intentionally 8,000 years ago,
so that's already 3,000 years older than what we're told--
Yes.
They were buried intentionally,
and we don't know the reason why,
we don't know who built them,
we don't know where the people came from,
we don't know specifically, their purpose.
There are no written records in terms of alphabets,
there are hieroglyphic images throughout
the vertical T-shaped stone columns
that comprise the circles.
The circles are of varying diameters.
They were buried intentionally,
again, 8,000 years ago.
The thinking is, perhaps to protect them,
but we don't know that for sure.
But the key is, that the lowest levels,
so the earliest occupations of this site
are now being dated
between 11,300 and 11,500 years before present.
Now, if that was an isolated incident,
we could say okay, it's a fluke.
Something else is going on.
But it's not.
It is one of a number of sites.
There's another site in Turkey,
(Inaudible) is the name of the site,
not far from Gobekli Tepe.
And these are very unfamiliar names
to us here in the west,
they're very familiar in archaeological circles.
It's being dated right around six to 7,000 years
before present.
There is a site that I didn't even talk about
last night,
it is a site that is now submerged under the water
off the coast of India,
that is being dated at 9,500 years.
The Great Sphinx is now being geologically dated
and peer reviewed articles
such as double A, P, G,
American Association of Petroleum Geologists,
that accepted that the Sphinx,
the body of the Sphinx,
based on the erosion marks
and the water it would require to create that erosion,
it has not been present except for very specific
periods of time, that the Sphinx,
is between seven and 9,000 years old.
Our history books tell us it was about 4,000 years ago.
Somebody made it, there's no written records,
there is, nobody knows, it is an idea
that someone came up with.
So these are just examples,
but where this gets really interesting,
is these dates that I'm sharing with you,
the end of the last ice age, geologically,
was between nine and 11,000 years ago.
And for these sites to have existed,
it means that they were either built during the ice age,
which is pretty unlikely,
or at least the end of the ice age,
they had to have existed before the ice
could cover the Earth and bury them
and specifically, the Sphinx,
the erosion, 12 feet deep in some places,
the grooves on the sides of the Sphinx.
Some are even saying, potentially,
15,000, John Anthony West goes way out on a limb on it.
He goes out on a limb, he does--
Even further back.
He does, and it's based on other evidence,
I'm just gonna say that I was trained as a scientist.
When I share information with my public,
it's important for me to share what I know is a fact.
Yes.
What I know is a fact, is that Robert Schoch,
the stratigrapher and paleontologist,
from Boston University,
has said, and he through his peer reviewed work,
is that the erosion on the Sphinx itself,
was caused by large amounts of fast moving water
over long periods of time,
not wind blown sand.
There has not been that kind of water
in the Sahara Desert since the rains formed
in the ice melted at the end of the last ice age.
And that dates at least seven to 9,000 years.
And who knows how long it existed, prior.
Now, precisely, we don't know how long before that,
and what John Anthony West is basing his dates on,
is he along with Robert Schoch,
used Earth imaging radar to look beneath
what they thought was the bedrock
that the Sphinx is resting upon.
And what they found is,
that what they Sphinx and the ground
it looks like the Sphinx is on,
is not really as it appears
and there is a lot of archaeological evidence
underneath, that remains underneath,
it is not being excavated for some pretty good reasons,
I would imagine,
a lot of them are social and political reasons,
and they don't wanna create the tension
that this kind of evidence would create
in an already tense part of the world.
It will be excavated, they're just using time.
And this is what John,
I believe, what John Anthony West
is basing his information upon.
So we're talking very advanced civilizations--
We're talking advanced civilizations,
and at least twice as old as what we've believed in the past
and also, they seem to cluster
around these 5,000 year marks.
So 5,000 years, the history,
I remember when I was in school
and when I used to study ancient Greece
and ancient Rome and I thought wow,
that's a long time ago,
and it's not that long ago
in terms of the history that we're now looking at,
it's all relative.
But the history that we've taught,
is the beginning of civilization.
It's not the beginning of civilization
for all time for the whole world.
It is the beginning of the most recent cycle
of civilization, the most recent 5,000 year cycle.
That emerged at the end of the last
5,000 year cycle.
And what we know about this,
this is where science and indigenous and
spiritual traditions all come together,
is that about every 5,125 years,
Earth's position in space
brings us to a place
where the conditions on Earth change.
The tilt, the wobble, the angle,
of our planet in relation to the center
of our Milky Way galaxy
and other forces of energy,
change on a rhythmic basis,
a cyclic basis, and we've talked about this before
in other interviews.
Somehow, our ancestors knew that.
And they told us, our own science couldn't confirm it
until late in the 20th century.
But it's interesting to me
that at least what we're seeing so far
is right around the 5,000 year mark
is this emergence of Sumerian
and Mesopotamian civilizations
and we say that's where writing began
and alphabets were developed.
Spiritual traditions, many of our most cherished
spiritual traditions began at that 5,000 year mark.
There's even speculation
that there were advanced technologies
used at that time that we're just now
going back into understanding.
There were, and that's what these sites are showing,
is down at 10,000 years,
we're seeing advanced civilizations,
that obviously existed,
how much of what they knew
percolated into the five most recent
5,000 years is what we're now beginning to understand.
We're now learning.
But the point of all this,
is that we've been here much longer
that what we've been led to believe.
And that there's this lineage of wisdom
that predates us,
we stand on the shoulders of our ancestors
who have come before us,
and because we are faced
with crisis that appears to be cyclic,
rhythmic, I think it behooves us to honor
the wisdom of our past
and to take into account what our ancestors
have preserved and shared for us today
and marry that with the best science of our time
to help, we need all the help we can get,
to solve the problems--
Yes.
And the crisis that are here,
so this is one place where science has got it wrong,
right now.
That civilization, the evidence
is so strong that we have been here
at least twice as long as,
in terms of civilization as what we believed in the past.
And that is one place where I think
we need to really make some inroads and
embrace the new evidence.
But even deeper than that,
the great question that we've asked ourselves,
for so long, since the earliest records
of humankind show up on Aboriginal rock paintings
in Australia dated at 23,000 years old,
is who are we,
and the way that we've answered this question,
a lot of people think
it's just a philosophical conversation,
but the answer to the question of who we are,
is the key
to the way that we solve our problems
and the choices that we make,
the policies that we enact,
the laws that we pass are all based in our beliefs
of who we are,
our relationship to one another,
our relationship to this Earth,
and our relationship to whatever is beyond this world.
This is why this question is so important.
In 1859, Charles Darwin,
attempted to answer this question
through his direct experiences
on a journey that he had
in the Galapagos Islands and other places.
He attempted to answer the question
through his observations
and the best science of his time.
And I'm not gonna say that what he did was right
or wrong, it worked for his period in history,
Darwin had no way of knowing what we know today.
He had no way of knowing about the complexities of life
inside of the cell,
the hundreds of thousands of mechanisms
that must be present all at once
for a cell to function properly.
We cannot evolve over long periods of time,
the respiration, metabolism, the reproduction of a cell,
if any one of those are gone,
the cell isn't going to function.
And one of Darwin's theories,
a portion of his theory of evolution
that was introduced in 1959,
is that nature only gives us what we need
when we need it.
So that we are endowed
is the term that he used,
we are endowed with the things that we need
only when the circumstances of life
precipitate a need for those things,
so he was looking at finches.
It's a species of bird in the Galapagos Islands
and he noticed that a certain species of finch
developed beaks
that were much bigger and much stronger
so that they could crack nuts from a different tree
that afforded them a greater food source,
and it was a perfectly,
it was a beautiful observation,
and he was right on,
and there was an adaptation of the finch
to do those things.
And this lead to a theory,
he called it the Theory of Evolution,
just encapsulate, the Theory of Evolution says that
in any species, there are differences,
some differences serve the species,
some do not, the ones that do
are passed on through the genes
to the offspring and they, rather than become unique
to a few they become the way that species is.
It's a good theory.
It's based on his direct observations.
And if he'd stop there I think he probably
would have been okay.
The problem is,
that Darwin himself,
took a theory that was specific to some animals
in some parts of the world,
and he tried to generalize that
to all life, including human life,
for all time.
And there are a number of assumptions,
that go along with this,
scientific assumptions.
One is that life itself
can come from non-life.
That what's called spontaneous generation,
that life developed over a long period of time,
from a random process of biology.
That is, that's one of the assumptions.
Another of the assumptions is that
these changes happen,
life is evolved slowly over long periods of time.
There's another assumption.
It has been condensed into the household word,
survival of the fittest.
That's a Darwinian assumption
that the fittest will prevail.
In whatever situation.
He tried to generalize these to all life
including human life,
now I'm gonna say right now,
I don't know the answer
to where we came from,
and I don't know the answer to how we got here,
I don't think any of us do right now.
My training as a scientist tells me
that science is a good way to understand
our world when we honor the principles of science itself,
and one of the key principles of science
is that when the evidence
no longer supports an idea,
we go back and create a new idea,
a new theory.
Science is not doing that right now.
Civilization is a perfect example,
the evidence shows we've been here
longer than 5,000 years,
but the history books aren't showing that.
In terms of biology and evolution,
the evidence clearly shows
life has never been documented
as originating spontaneously,
there's no scientific evidence
that it will or can happen
for a number of very good scientific reasons
yet it is an assumption that is still being made
and taught in the schools today.
Okay, the idea that
survival of the fittest,
there were 400 peer reviewed studies,
that were done in late 1990,
well, they've been done for the last 100 years,
they were reviewed by Alfie Kohn in the late 1990's,
and the bottom line to all 400 studies,
they were designed to answer a single question,
and the question is simply this,
what is the optimum amount of competition
that will benefit members of any species?
400, over 400 studies all came to the same number
and the number is zero.
Zero.
And when I talk about competition
I'm talking about violent competition,
not a friendly game of soccer or chess
or something like that,
alway, always--
Survival oriented competition.
Precisely, always, always, always,
where it's called mutual aid or cooperation
benefits a species,
they live longer, they're healthier,
they have more options for the way
and innovations, the way they can live their lives.
The animal kingdom clearly shows this,
and they go back and show studies
of insect populations that work together,
ant colonies for example, bee colonies.
Nature is not based on survival of the fittest
as fittest has been defined by science
in the modern world.
It's not about the strongest,
now where we've gotten into trouble with this,
is it's very easy for a distorted mind
to take that science and bend it
and skew it in very unhealthy ways.
And some of the greatest horrors
of the most oppressive dictatorships and regimes
in the 20th century, including Nazi Germany,
including--
Pol Pot?
Pol Pot, and the way that he
was imposing his beliefs on the people
of Cambodia.
Some of the greatest atrocities,
they all are based back
in the ideas of survival of the fittest.
And the only
that only those characteristics
that benefit the species
should be passed on in the thinking of these people--
That's a basic might is right.
Might is right in the thinking of these people,
was that they would help nature along,
and weed out what they considered to be
the imperfect races.
Now, I'm not saying Darwin's responsible for that,
I'm saying that these ideas,
are important in our lives,
because they, the way we think of ourselves,
consciously and subconsciously
is based upon the language of science
that we've grown to trust.
At least to a degree.
This is important because
as we're now facing the great crisis,
and some of the crisis are what people perceive
as competition for resources.
If we go about solving those problems
the way we have in the last 150 years
since Darwin's time, we're in trouble.
Because we've done it through military might.
And it has not served us,
the wars that happened in the past
have been very different from the kind of wars
that will develop today if we use that principle
and apply it through the technology of today.
We're in very, very dangerous territories to do that.
And we're teetering right on the edge,
and it's the year 2011, 2011 is a pivotal year.
Yeah, I was going to ask you about that
from the time code.
Sure and--
Let's go into that now,
and how this plays in--
Well, from many perspectives,
so I just wanna, kind of wanna wrap this up,
the way we think of ourselves
is important.
And while we may have our personal
and intuitive sense for what life is all about,
when we see it confirmed
in a peer reviewed journal
in the language of science
and it's accepted in media
and it's accepted by our friends and our families
and our universities and our governments
it does have an effect on the way we think about ourselves.
Yes.
It certainly does.
It's called programming.
It is.
(laughing)
Well, the last piece that I wanna talk about,
the other thing, is the last piece,
there is another alternative theory
that is emerging that is catching a lot of flack
from the scientific community,
and it's called intelligent design.
And a lot of people roll their eyes
when they hear that because
they think it's an old idea of creationism,
being re-framed on a different language.
In its truest sense, it is not.
It is not true.
What intelligent design simply says,
and this is the essence of the theory itself,
is that the ideas of Darwinism don't apply
to life, and specifically human life.
That the evidence that was not available to Darwin,
the inner intricacies of a cell,
the 100's of 1000's of processes
that must be simultaneously present
for a cell to work,
the intricacies of DNA.
Darwin had no way of knowing about those things
and he said himself,
Darwin in his writings,
he said if ever it can be proven
that an organ in a body does not follow
the principles of evolution
he said my whole theory falls apart.
He allowed for that,
but science will not allow for his theory
to evolve into a greater understanding.
Intelligent design simply says,
that life and the universe, the patterns of life,
are best described,
and I wanna use the right language here,
through a directed process
rather than random events of biology.
By directed process, it doesn't say who
or what or how,
it simply suggests there's some form
of intelligence
that underlies the life as we see it today,
and many scientists have entire careers
vested in the idea that that is not the case
and they're very reluctant to let that go.
And I'm not saying one's right or wrong,
but what I'm saying is,
we're in trouble here on planet Earth,
and we've got problems to solve,
and to forbid us academically
from investigating another theory
is unscientific unto itself.
To forbid to even teach the possibility
of some form of intelligent design
I think is not serving us right now,
it's my personal opinion.
What seems to me, is simply acknowledging
that there is an innate intelligence to the field,
that is participating in the creative process
of all things.
That's all it is, other people
are reading other things into it.
So the strongest evidence for intelligent design
is simply something that's called
irreducible complexity, and very complicated term
for a very simple idea.
It simply means
that the systems of life as we know them today
from the cells to the DNA,
bacteria and the way things work,
evolution in and of itself cannot explain
the way that they've appeared,
because in an irreducibly complex system,
everything must be present.
Yes.
All at the same time or it won't work.
The mousetrap is the perfect example.
If there's one piece of a mousetrap
that's not there, that mousetrap
is not gonna trap the mouse.
And everything must be there simultaneously
and the human body, hemoglobin
is a beautiful example.
20 different proteins must be present
for a hemoglobin to allow our blood to clot.
And if one of those is not there,
when we begin to bleed,
it won't clot, we'll bleed and bleed and bleed.
Those proteins all have to be there
simultaneously and life appears to be functioning
in this way and the geological record
itself shows that rather than evolve
over long periods of time,
most, 98% of what's called the phyla,
of life as we know it today,
the different species of life,
appeared about 545 million years ago,
boom, in what's called the Cambrian explosion.
It's considered to be the Big Bang of life.
And from there they've adapted and changed over time,
and that's true, and we have
a beautiful fossil record of that,
but that Cambrian explosion is a problem
for people that support the theory of evolution
because it does not show life evolving gradually
slowly over long periods of time to reach that point.
Boom, something happened.
As new features are needed as you said earlier,
and you mentioned last night about
the human brain itself.
Human brain is perfect--
This is the perfect example.
Well humankind, human, for me,
humankind fits, is a completely different category.
We appeared, we humans appeared,
about 200,000 years ago.
And the fossil evidence shows
that our bodies have changed
very little in those 200,000 years.
Modern humans appeared,
our skulls, our brain capacity is the same now,
as it was then.
And that's not evolution,
evolution says that we are only given
what we need when we need it.
Why would humankind 200,000
years ago have needed the brain capacity
we have today to live at least the way we believe
that they lived?
So I think evolution definitely exists.
It applies to some forms of life,
it's been observed.
Adaption, or adaptation,
is also plays a role in this.
I think the problem
is trying to apply it to all life,
number one and number two
to human life.
Something very, very different happened
200,000 years ago,
and if science, if we could take the
beautiful, brilliant minds and hearts
of some of the best minds of our time
and apply it to looking honestly,
what happened 200,000 years ago?
How did we get here?
And really apply the energy
to asking that new question,
rather than trying to prove an old idea
that is not working out.
We've been, we have been for 150 years
since Darwin's theory
trying to find the missing links that are still missing
in the fossil record
and I believe they're missing because
they don't exist.
I agree.
Okay, this brings up a really good question.
As we come into this time
and the time code says these things
you're going to talk about in a minute,
a lot of disintegration of systems is set to occur
starting in 2011 really and moving forward.
The world of science itself,
it's like when you have nothing to lose,
you can become and share what you truly are
and know,
when you have nothing left to lose.
Well, there's so much that's being lost now,
and I would have to think
that that includes scientific grant money.
A lot of people continue with their science
for pure economics.
Absolutely.
Now when the money goes away,
may some of those brilliant minds be freed up?
Are you seeing evidence that some of these minds
are being freed up to look in new places, now?
I don't know the answer to what you're saying.
I know that science has become an industry.
Science is a business.
And I'm not saying that's right, wrong,
good or bad, it's how it's applied,
all of this,
I'm not saying that our choices are bad,
or that the way we've lived is bad,
everything we've done has served us
to get to the point where we are right now,
where we can look back and say
where do we go from here?
If the things we done in the past
are working for us, let's do a lot of it.
And if they're not working for us anymore,
let's stop and move forward.
When it comes to the human ego,
entire careers, 40, 50 years of textbooks
are based in a story
that is all tied up, it's neat and tidy,
it's the way things have been taught.
And my sense is that a generation
of scientists will have to pass
before this is broadly accepted
in our academics and in the schools,
the idea that civilization is much older
than we've ever believed,
the ideas of Darwin's theories,
I think all this should be in the past,
but the problem is,
we may not have a generation--
Exactly.
Of time to solve some of the problems.
So what I am proposing and what I would like
to see happen is at least allow
we've got such brilliant minds
in this planet.
Allow them the possibility of exploring an idea
that is outside the bounds of Darwinian theory.
Just explore it and see where it goes.
And if it goes nowhere then we can put an end to it,
and we can say that was not a good idea.
If, however, it gives us answers and maybe
there's a theory that can merge
between the two,
but it all comes down to the way we think about ourselves,
we're looking to science to validate who we are
and based on that validation
we're making the choices of our future
the choices of economics,
do we choose a kind of economics
that is inclusive or that is exclusive to people?
A global population, do we share
the disappearing resources,
do we share the technology?
Do we share energy, the power grid,
do we create a global community,
or do we grab the pieces of the pie
that we think are available for those that can
and for those that can't they're on their own,
and they fend for themselves.
These are the implications of the choices
that are being made right now,
and the choices are being made
through an incomplete, in my opinion,
and incomplete understanding
of who we are, our nature, and our relationship
to the world.
We've made those choices in the past,
we have a civilization now, 100 years,
of civilization and we can see
what it has brought to us based on the ideas
of separation,
on the ideas of survival of the fittest,
on the ideas that we have one shot
at civilization, it started here primitively,
it's evolving to here and this is it.
When we see ourselves with a history
and a lineage and a cyclic nature,
what we can learn from the past,
it changes everything.
It changes the whole conversation.
So this is why I think this is important.
I agree with you,
I couldn't agree more with you.
And now, let's say that we have a body of people
which is growing by the day,
which is including the people watching this right now,
who are saying we're not waiting for science
to tell us anything.
Sure.
We're kind of blowing past science now.
So now, let's talk about how to address that
within ourselves.
Where we have to create systems for ourselves.
I think, absolutely, first of all,
I wanna say science is important.
I'm not discounting science in it's true sense.
It's the way science is being applied.
The way it's being taught
and the business that is growing from science.
So if we stick to science as the language,
science says you have an idea,
you test the idea,
the tests give you facts,
if the facts support the idea you go with it,
if they don't, you change the idea.
If you don't do that, it's not science.
We're not doing it, so it's not science.
And I wanna be very clear about that,
but without that, I think we all have an intuitive sense,
everyone learns differently.
We all have an intuitive sense
of who we are personally,
our families, our communities,
what our planet is all about,
many of us watching this,
I think we feel that we're part of a living system,
that Earth is a living entity.
That we are an evolving life form
here on this planet
about to be birthed into a greater
sense of unity in life.
And there are little things that we can do
everyday in our lives
that support that kind of unity,
you don't have to fight the big battles
to make a difference.
Little things, every moment of our lives,
every day we eat,
we entertain ourselves,
we make choices in terms of industry and commerce
and if the way we make all of these choices
individually, are our collective answer
to our time in history.
So when people choose simply to eat organic food
grown locally in their own backyard,
rather than relying on a food source
that's grown halfway around the world
and the huge carbon footprint on the jet
that gets it over
and the corporation has to use a lot of chemicals
to grow that amount of food to supply the demand.
Simply buying local, organic,
you support your friends,
you support your community,
if the weather is bad or if there's a war
and supplies are cut off,
you still got food to eat,
it's healthy, you're much better for it.
That is a big, big choice.
What kinds of industry and commerce do we support?
Do we support industry that is,
that works with integrity?
Do they honor their employees?
Is it only about the bottom line
for that industry
and is the bottom line supporting
an emerging, sustainable way of life?
We look at the things breaking down,
it's so fascinating for me,
the only things breaking down
are the things that are no longer sustainable.
The economic systems that are no longer sustainable,
the ways that we--
Consume.
Give ourselves the things that we need
and I'm not saying we need to live primitive lifestyles,
we can have vehicles that we drive individually
if we wanna do that,
and we can have electricity in every home,
there are just different ways of
going about getting those things,
other than what we've done for the last
100 or 150 years.
Media, this is very, and this is why I so honor you,
and I'm always honored to do,
when I look on my itinerary and I see
that we have an interview coming up,
I always get a big smile on my face
when I'm thinking about it--
Me too.
Because you do a beautiful job
and you're very honoring.
Thank you.
Of your guests, you're a gracious interviewer,
but you are an example of conscious media.
And conscious media is so important
because there's a growing body
of scientific evidence now
that suggests that the images we surround ourselves with,
the conversations that we engage in
quickly become the reality of our lives
and our world.
And I'm not saying it's right, wrong,
good, or bad, either,
but what I'm saying is,
if we surround ourselves
only with frightening images of war
and violence and blood and
lustful relationships that don't honor the promises
and commitments we've made in our lives,
if that's all that we're surrounded with,
I wouldn't be surprised to see those things
in the reality of our world.
It's important to balance those things,
with life affirming images and programming
of hope and possibility,
at least balance those things out.
So conscious media,
playable transformation, social transformation,
is peace being taught in our schools
and educational systems.
When I was in school
I was taught that war is good for business.
And I have worked with publishers
in the past that have said to me,
Gregg you can write any book you want,
but please don't ever bring me a book of peace.
Because peace doesn't sell.
And this is the kind of languaging that has been used
in the industry in the past,
now I'm with a very conscious publisher right now,
Hay House Publishing,
who gives back to the community
and is open to all possibilities
and supports the new ideas
and the emerging, life affirming kinds of things
that we can do in our lives,
but all of these choices,
peace can be an industry,
and it can be a viable, profitable industry,
nothing wrong with making money
from peaceful endeavors,
so for example, if we took all of the unemployed,
not just the United States
but of the planet right now,
and we had the leaders of our nations
that did the same thing John Kennedy did
in the early 60's, he said we're gonna be
in the moon in 10 years,
we were ahead of the schedule,
it took less than 10 years,
the technology was already there.
No one had ever given the directive
and said make this happen.
If the leaders of our world
would come together and say
we are gonna take our unemployed,
and rather than evolve a new civilization over time,
we are going to take this year and next year,
and we're going to wean this planet from fossil fuels,
we're gonna take all of the unemployed,
and we're gonna build the most amazing,
wind generators.
We're gonna build solar panels where there's sun,
where there's not, we're gonna use wave energy.
Where there's not, we're gonna tie it into
a power grid that everyone can share,
we can do that, that is an organism working together,
and this is the way biology in nature
shows us that we work,
so these are possibilites
that could happen,
but before they happen,
we need to see a need.
And before we see a need we've got to be very clear
on who we are in our relationship to the world
and all that's changing now.
So 2011, we're going to do,
let's do the last little bit on the time code
and we have one more quick question for you,
'cause I know you have catch a plane.
I have to go create a carbon footprint
to go somewhere.
Indeed you do.
(laughing)
Sorry.
So by the time code calculation,
2011 is a pivotal year,
having to do with the economies,
tying back into the great depression,
having to do with the potential for war,
but also the potential to end.
And that I loved last night.
In previous programs we've talked about
a book that was released 2009,
it was called Fractal Time.
And Fractal Time,
of the many things it describes,
it's based on the principles that
that the events of life and nature
are cyclic and they follow rhythms
that are very simple to calculate.
They don't predict exactly what's going to happen,
they say that the conditions that lead to climate change
or the conditions that lead to war
or an economic collapse,
those conditions repeat.
The choices we make within those conditions
determine what happens.
But the conditions are there.
So based on that,
we can go back and look
at key events in the past that define our lives
and our world today,
and we can look at those events
such as global war, economic collapse,
and peace, and we can see when those cycles
or when these cycles for those things
repeat.
And what's so interesting in what you're referring to now,
is this is the year 2011,
and some of the greatest crisis
that precipitated
the suffering of the 20th century,
that happened in different years,
those cycles are converging in the year 2011.
So 1914 was the first year for global war
in the modern world,
2011 is the year that cycle repeats.
1929, first global economic collapse,
2011 that cycle repeats.
1945 was the end of the second world war,
the second global war and the beginning of
a relative era of peace,
that cycle repeats.
The beauty of knowing all of these things
is that when one cycle ends before
the next opens,
there's a window of opportunity
called the choice point.
And that choice point
is when our choices
become even more potent than they normally are.
We can always make choices,
but this is a window of opportunity
when we stack the deck in our favor,
and our choices have a greater potency.
So 2011 is a year when the cycle
that carries the conditions
that have defined so much of our world
in the last 100 years repeats.
Cycles of economic collapse,
war and suffering,
but it also means that the cycle that began
the relative era of peace
also repeats,
and every one of those cycles
because they end in 2011 and the next one begins,
it means 2011 is a window of choice points
unlike any that we've seen
in recorded human history
for the last 5,000 years.
We have the opportunity to make the choices
to redefine the patterns of the past
before they begin again,
and this may be what our indigenous ancestors
were so excited about for 2012.
2012 is not the end of the world,
it's the end of a world age and a way of being.
2012 is the beginning of a new way of being
and it implys, if that's the beginning of the new way,
that all the changes must be in place before 2012 gets here.
So I think 2011 is a pivotal year
for us in our world.
I feel it.
And people around,
the people that we surround ourselves with,
everybody can feel the truth
in what you say,
now this final question is,
overlay the Isaiah Effect,
overlay the tipping point with the choice point.
Sure, well the Isaiah Effect was a book
that was written in 1998,
released in 2000.
This whole notion of the tipping point
happening at a choice point.
Sure, it references the lineage of wisdom
that links our modern world
with the past.
That lineage has been broken
a couple of times in history
and each time it's broken
we lose information about ourselves
and now we're recovering that information
in places like the Dead Sea Scrolls,
the (inaudible) Library,
and the bottom line to that information,
is it is the information that was lost
is the very information that tells us
how to choose in a choice bind.
How to tip the scales of life and balance
in our favor and peace.
In our favor.
And I think it's no accident,
that all of this is happening all at once.
It's only now at the end of a 5,125 year long
world age cycle,
that began the biblical era,
it's only now at the end of that cycle,
when we're faced with the greatest number
and the greatest magnitude of crisis
ever to face humankind in recorded human history,
on one hand that looks pretty scary,
on the other hand, that our own science
is now coming full circle,
and if we honor what science is telling us,
it's telling us that we're part of the world
rather than separate from it,
we've been here for a long time,
we have the experience to deal with these things
and get through it if we learn the lessons
of the past and honor what the science
is actually telling us.
And there is an intelligence that underlies
our physical reality and our bodies.
When we work in harmony with that intelligence,
things seem to go a lot, lot better.
And I think this is the lesson that's happening now
at this time,
and this is the significance of understanding
the deep truths of our lives.
The title of the new book is called Deep Truth.
And it's based on the statement that
Niels Bohr, the 20th century physicist,
Nobel Prize winning physicist,
that worked on the Manhattan Project
among others,
that he mentioned in a conversation
that he was having with other physicists,
and what he said was this,
he said it's the hallmark of any deep truth
that it's negation is also a deep truth.
And what he's saying is,
when we find something that we cling to
because we believe it's true,
and then we find a new fact
that tells us that that truth no longer exists,
the new truth is also a deep truth
even though it may be the opposite
of the original truth.
The example that we began this conversation with
the theory in 1887,
that there's a field of energy that connects all things,
scientists said it doesn't exist,
that was a deep truth.
For 100 years,
all of our science based on what we believed
was the deep truth,
that everything is separate from everything else,
there's no field of energy connecting anything.
1987, the field is found to be true.
That's different than the original truth,
but that is a deep truth unto itself.
And that's a beautiful example of a deep truth
and how it's opposite is also a deep truth,
and I think 2011 is the year of deep truths.
Where the things that we've held dearly
and clung to, ferociously, in some cases,
that describe who we are are being redefined,
and we get to find out who we really are
and in the presence of who we are,
the crisis took on a whole new meaning.
And our role in those crisis takes on
a new meaning, everything changes.
and I think this is what our ancestors saw coming for us.
They said that the end of this world age,
when we look back and the one lifetime
that straddles the two worlds,
we won't recognize ourselves,
we won't recognize our lives,
and our world, and I think we can say that
right now, we're very different
that we were 10 years ago.
Absolutely.
Our world is very different.
I'm an optimist.
And I believe we're going someplace
really beautiful,
but I'm also a realist,
and for whatever reason,
we've taken a very secularist route
to get there.
Why we didn't simply choose
a way of living and say let's do it,
rather than bumping up against global war
and say, oh, we don't like that,
and bumping up against holocaust
and global economic collapse, oh, we don't like that,
but we seem to learn by experiencing
what we don't want before we know
we don't want it.
Indeed.
Okay, and I believe that where we find ourselves now,
is exploring the truths of what is,
and I believe, I believe in our hearts,
and I believe in our power of change,
and I believe that we love one another,
we may not always like one another,
but we love one another
on this planet and I believe our love
will carry us through to a beautiful new world.
We've got to get through the transition.
And that transition is what we're living right now.
Is now.
Thank you so much for taking time today.
Thank you.
For any of you who have not read his book
Fractal Time, you might wanna pick up a copy.
I've been following his work
for more than 15 years now,
and find a beautiful flow to his discoveries.
You might also want to watch my last two interviews
of Gregg as well for a quick sketch of his work.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(peaceful music)